Osteoarthritis (OA) is a worldwide common chronic regressive disease that causes pain and even disability in the joints of patients. Currently, traditional diagnostic methods for OA have disadvantages such as high cost and long time consumption. For this reason, it is urgent to have a method that can diagnose osteoarthritis quickly and accurately. During this study, we suggest a multi-column convolutional neural networks (MCNN) model based on Mel-frequency cepstral coefficient (MFCC). 
We were able to collect serum samples from 98 patients with osteoarthritis and 30 healthy people, and divided all serum sample data into training and testing sets on a 7:3 basis for model training and performance evaluation.In this study, the data were first preprocessed using partial least squares (PLS) and MFCC. The preprocessed data are then imported into a one-dimensional convolutional neural network model (1D-CNN) for classification, and the performance of the model is comprehensively evaluated by using a five-fold cross-validation.In order to further investigate the model's ability to recognize spectral features, we constructed the MFCC feature sequences into a 2D spectral feature map by the Spectrum Segmentation Method (SSM) and input them into a 2D convolutional neural network model (2D-CNN) for classification, Comparison experiments with 2D-CNN based on Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) were also conducted.In addition, this study further improves the performance of the model for 2D spectral feature maps by taking advantage of the fact that MCNN can fuse multi-level features.
The test results showed that the MFCC-SSM-MCNN model proposed in this paper demonstrated higher classification efficiency in diagnosing osteoarthritis, with an accuracy of up to 95.0% and an AUC of up to 0.979.These outcomes confirm that serum Raman spectroscopy coupled with convolutional neural networks can successfully diagnose OA, offering a useful adjunct technique for the early diagnosis of OA. This important finding provides a new way to treat OA in the clinic.
